---
layout: post
title: "Portal Space Review"
date: 2025-09-09
categories: Control CATEGORY-2
usemathjax: true
---

Portal Space is building a delta-V spacecraft to help transport payloads from LEO to Cislunar level using a new novel propulsion method to use solar energy to energize mono-propellant and induce a phase change.


## Underactuation

The Supernova spacecraft is an underactuated system because it has fewer actuators than degrees of freedom. This spacecraft has two thrusters pointed in the same direction, mounted at the bottom of the spacecraft in the -Z direction. The spacecraft has 6 degrees of freedom X, Y, Z, roll, pitch, yaw.

This leads to an interesting control problem. Attitude control is essential to all spacecraft. For example, this system must orient itself such that it can direct its propulsion system. Furthermore, this spacecraft requires thermal energy by directing the sun's light rays. Thus it is advantageous for this system to be able to position itself such that it can capture the most amount of direct sunlight with its mirror-array.

The question is how does this underactuated system control attitude.

## Solar Thermal Propulsion (STP)

This new type of propulsion is called Solar Thermal Propulsion(STP). Thrust is generated by the rapid expansion of a monopropellant fuel(ammonium). This fuel turns from liquid to gas through a rapid energy transfer in the systems heat exchanger. The heat exchanger is supplied with energy from the large mirror arrays that concentrate the sunlight 

## Resources:
1. Portal Homesite, https://www.portalsystems.space/
2. Website review of STP, http://www2.ee.ic.ac.uk/derek.low08/yr2proj/solarthermal.htm
3. NASA Doc, testing STP, https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20030068437/downloads/20030068437.pdf