---
layout: post
title: "Gumption"
date: 2025-01-18
categories: Zen
usemathjax: true
---

Notes from Chapter 26, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance. 

object $\rightarrow$ subject
+ value
+ Quality is composed of value
    + value can be influenced by past data becoming biased
    

Gumption = "enthousiasmos"
+ "filled with theos", to see and feel the universe

Problem: Get away from generalities

## Gumption Traps
Causes you to lose sight of Quality

Types of Gumption Traps, External vs. Interal

### External = "setbacks"
ex: 
out of sequence assemblies, intermittent failures, part problems

### Internal = "hang ups"

#### Value Traps:
blocks affective understanding

ex: value rigity, ego, anxiety, boredom, etc.

#### Truth Traps:
blocks cognitive understanding

ex: mu

mu doesn't answer the question it expands the hypothesis. "yes"/"no" confirms the hypothesis i.e. the experimenter asked the right question, but a mu conclusion is helpful. The hypothesis is the question.

#### Muscle Traps:
blocks psychomotor behavior

ex: inadequate tools, insensitivity


#### The "Zombie-fication" of the Funeral Procession


## Things to Focus on
1. Seek problems to question out understanding and mastery of a subject
2. Sit with in frustration, slow down
3. Be detailed oriented
4. Be open-minded
5. Be modest
6. Have a beginners mindset
7. Take rests, drink coffee
8. Scale down goals, prioritize importantce

## Final Thoughts

1. The way you live predisposes you to avoid traps and see the right facts
2. The real cycle is youself. The machine that appears "out there" is not separate from "in here".
3. You either grow towards Quality or fall away from it.